Now for the view from Beijing. Here's a
quick glance at Chinese media. An
article on Xiinping's economic thought
strikes an assertive tone on trade
tensions with the United States. It
frames the tariff spat as among the
tough battles and protracted wars China
must endure to make the economy
stronger. It says China will fight to
the end and quote Xiinping's call for
party members to quote enhance the sense
of crisis, carry forward the spirit of
struggle and improve the ability to
fight. Uh just glancing at the global
times this morning uh well the take
there is that the US should not be
surprised by moves out of China and
editorial editorial they're blaming
Washington for this recent escalation
pointing to this series of restrictions
and tariff threats after those talks of
course in Madrid. Now it says if well it
says the US overestimated its leverage
while quote underestimating China's
capacity for counteraction and its
strategic composure. Let's take you now
straight to Shanghai and bring in our
next guest. Wuin Bua is the director of
the center for American studies at Fuang
University. He's also an adviser to the
Chinese foreign ministry. Professor,
thank you so much for the time. Um I
want I wanted to start off with the
theoretical end and outcome and maybe we
can reverse engineer and work backwards
here.
Do you think a meeting between the two
presidents is confirmed or is set to
take place in two weeks time? Can we
start off there and then we'll work
backward?
>> Well, theoretically uh a meeting between
two leaders are still possible and uh I
think both sides have uh interest in
pursuing uh this uh in person meeting
between two leaders for the first time
since the second uh Trump
administration. uh however we need to
work hard to improve the situation so
that the meeting uh will be uh fruitful
not just a photo opportunity.
>> Right? So when we've been looking up at
the the leadup to this potential meeting
uh the lot of the narrative has been
that each side has been trying to build
up their own leverage so then they have
room uh to negotiate based on their
perceived positions of strength. uh from
your perspective as an academic and also
an adviser to those in the foreign
ministry, do do you feel one side might
be building or overplaying their hand
too much or or building too much
reliance on their leverage?
>> Uh that's a good question. Uh I mean if
you look at the uh US China uh trade and
economic relations uh how they have
evolved over the uh last couple of years
uh the US side started with the
unpreented uh tariff war on China from
the first Trump administration and then
moved to uh uh the tech war on China uh
especially uh during the B
administration. Now during the second
Trump administration the tariff war was
uh relaunched again and with more
Chinese uh enterprises have been put on
the equity list have been sanctioned by
the US side. So if you follow the
developments it has been the US who has
been keep pushing China building
pressure on China overplay uh it cut on
China weaponize the interdependence
between two countries. So finally it
forced China to fight back to retaliate.
So back to September 19th when President
Xi and President Trump had phone
conversation basically I think that
conversation was quite constructive but
only 10 days later the US you know the
BIS come up with a new rule of 50% rule
uh which actually will put thousands of
more Chinese enterprises on the entity
list. So that's a huge impact not only
on the Chinese enterprises on Chinese uh
uh uh economy but more importantly it
raised the issue on the Chinese side
whether the US is serious about you know
uh forging some consensus
in the forthcoming summit and steady by
uh uh and step by step to improve trade
relation with China or the US side I
within the Trump administration was
simply divided you know with some
pragmatist who wanted to improve
relation with China but then you have
the hawkish people they never want to
you know have a normal relation with
China they want to push for strategic
decoupling they want to derail this
relationship so I think this issue has
been has to be put in a broader context
>> professor what gets us back on track in
terms of
um good faith, good spirits ahead of the
meeting. Uh do we need to see gestures
from both sides an offramp into the
meeting? So in other words, what I'm
trying to get to is specifically, do you
think the Chinese are expecting the US
president to remove the the threat of
tariffs uh in order to prove that good
faith?
Uh
well I think the the first step is for
the US side to scare back the new rule
the 50% new rule um this uh on the
Chinese uh enterprises that the BS come
up on September 29th. So and then let's
go back um to the the recent round of
talks the m talks the agreement achieved
at the talks and also the spirit as two
leaders agreed upon when they had the
form conversation on September uh 19th.
So as for the you know new tariff uh on
China I think I mean Trump he he he
changes always you know sometimes he say
this may happen sometimes say he hope
that doesn't have to happen so that's
not already in place but you know what
had what has been announced by the US
side is September 29th new rule the 50%
you know regulation I think that is
important for the US to scale
Professor Woo, let me just play the
devil's advocate a little bit here and
and and ask your opinion on whether you
feel that the Chinese government might
be overplaying its hand a little bit
right now. That's something that's come
out of Washington. Uh that essentially
they thought they had some sort of
agreement on the relaxation of the
export curbs on rare earth metals and
magnets. Uh and then China now has taken
a much more assertive uh position in
between the rounds of trade talks by uh
talking about more strict control.
Granted, China is trying to gain some
leverage ahead of the next round of
talks, ahead of any kind of summit, but
are they potentially overplaying their
hand in an assertive way that could also
uh make other nations outside of the
United States uh more angry and disrupt
supply chains? We're seeing the G7
finance ministers meeting in Washington
DC where they're going to be talking
about their own reaction to China's
actions on rare earths.
Uh well two points uh first over uh
whether this is u overplayed or not well
that depends on whether China can you
know effectively force the US to scare
back again is it September 29th B new
rule. So anything that can get the US to
cancel this uh latest uh pressure on
China will be necessary. So that's point
one. Point two regarding you know u
broader uh ramifications of China's
recent uh export control policy uh I
think most countries know this is not
particularly targeted on them it is
mainly a retaliation to the recent the
US moves on China. So if these countries
they handle relations with China
especially trade and economic relations
with China well without assisting the US
in sanctioning China in in pursuing the
export control of China. I think you
know they don't have to worry about
this. So basically this actually gives
China more leverage in making sure other
US allies will not jump aboard to help
the US in pressuring China. I think
China knows how to play the card uh
wisely.
>> How about the soybean issue? Obviously
it's hit hard at the base of the the
voting base if you will in the Midwest
of the United States. China has not
bought a single crop uh order of from
this current crop for a month and a half
into that. Is that an area where you
feel because China does need to import
crops of soybean that is an area of
leverage that China could perhaps uh be
amendable to buying or pledging to buy?
Or has China already pretty much shifted
all of its orders this season to
Argentina to Brazil and how how
important of leverage is this?
Uh well uh I think the uh soybean issue
is also uh part of China's leverage in
dealing with uh Donald Trump's new
tariff on China. So if two sides during
the next uh trade talks can agree to
address the tariff issue then it is
possible China may reconsider to
purchase more US agricultural products.
So again this is you know uh it is
important to the US we understand but
you know the tariff is also important to
China. So we have to address each
other's legitimate concern so that we
can have a win-win situation. So that is
uh an issue that can be negotiable.
>> Okay. the the possib US Secretary Scott
Bessant mentioned that we're effectively
operating on sort of the rolling over of
these 90-day truses, these extensions if
you will and we're obviously
markets, businessmen, investors,
newsrooms around the world are fixated
now in this last week of October when
that is when the next of course meeting
and hopefully the last deadline uh is
going to be taking place. But in your
view, professor, do you think we still
should consider
another extension of these talks beyond
beyond October?
>> Well, I think the um
another extension is a minimum. Uh but
what I expect is something more than
that.
>> I mean, if two leaders meet, they should
not just agree, let's you know, extend
this for another 90 days. they should
make the decision you know to solve the
tariff issue uh whether this is going to
be totally removed as the Chinese side
suggest because this is a union later
tariff you know illegal or it will be
10% or 50% then that will be reciprocal
I think the two leaders if they meet
first and foremost they should make make
decision on the tariff issue rather than
you know leaving this to future for
another 90 days or for 100 days because
the business community in both countries
and broadly they don't like uncertainty
they want you know a clear message from
both sides and also I believe at this
stage China and US should be ready and
prepared to you know put an end to the
tariff issue to some extent the US side
Donald Trump himself should now
understand the limit of his tariff cut
on China you he has overplayed it and it
has been counterproductive. and has been
hurting both sides and in the US side
even more so if you look the uh um uh
the uh inflation rate uh coming back in
the US so it's time to put an end to the
tariff card of course China and the US
will continue to you know um struggle on
other fronts but tariff to some extent
is an card that should be discarded in
my opinion
>> professor we've heard consistent ly and
constantly from the Chinese side the the
the request for respect to be treated on
equal grounds the uh we've heard
consistently as well from the Chinese
side that you know if they the China
does not want to get into this but we'll
fight of course if if if pushed do you
think if they don't agree to terms do
you think is China prepared to walk away
from the table you think
>> uh I assume China.
I mean we try to work for
a good situation a win-win outcome but
we have to prepare for a worst case
scenario. I think that had been the case
since the beginning of the second trauma
administration if you look back you know
the the the earlier uh crossfire between
two sides of a tariff issue. So China
didn't back for negotiation and when
every time when we sit down for
negotiation you know if no agreements
could be achieved we can walk away
without any agreement. So that's
something we can accept. We don't back
for negotiation. We don't back for talk.
We don't back for uh you know
achievements. But if you have the
willing to strike a deal, we are
prepared.